---
title: "My Favorite 32 MP3s"
date: 2017-06-26T22:15:04-04:00
draft: true
---

Last month [some patents for MP3 technology expired](https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/mgmxvx/mp3-is-not-dead) (some folks reported this as "MP3 is dead", though that's not quite right). For me served as another reminder of the fact that we're _streaming_ a lot more media rather than downloading it and storing it (Netflix, Spotify, Pandora, etc.), which is a sort of melancholy thought to me. The bargain we're taking is trading ownership of files for access to a celestial jukebox. 

Of course, ethics behind the artist payment models of services like Spotify aside, that's pretty cool. Most of the MP3s that I still store on a 1 TB external hard drive on my desk are available on Spotify, which has a nicer UI than the current version of iTunes. But there are a few songs I've got tucked in there that haven't hit those clouds just yet. 

My favorite of these, by far, is a particular live Jeff Tweedy concert from March of 2007. I downloaded it from a torrent-hosting site for concert recordings ("tapes") called bt.etree.org sometime that year or the next (I just checked and [it's still being seeded!](http://bt.etree.org/details.php?id=506953)). 

The etree page lists a description for each of its torrents. Here's the description of this Tweedy show: 

    Jeff Tweedy
    Letters to Santa Benefit
    Living Room Concert (#3)
    The Coleman Home
    Winnetka, IL
    Saturday March 3, 2007

    Recording and Transfer By: ckc

    Source: Multi-track Soundboard + Room Mics (Studio Projects C4, X/Y 12' back, 6.5' up) > MOTU Traveler > MOTU Audiodesk > SDII Audio Files (44.1kHz/24-bit)
    Transfer: SDII Audio Files > ProTools 7.3.1 (Mixing, Processing, Mixdown) > AIFF > Peak 5.2 (Mastering, Dither, Tracking) > AIFF > xACT 1.58 (Level 6 w/verify) > FLAC


doing a lot more streami


http://bt.etree.org/details.php?id=506953
